[DOC] Revised Tune search performance doc (#3582)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/operations/backend_search.md

Regardless of whether or not you are using TraceQL or the original search API, Tempo searches all of the blocks
in the specified time range.
Depending on your volume, this may result in slow queries.

> This document explains how Tempo’s read path works, what controls you have to tune the read path, details of the core configuration options, and how to tune these configuration options to get the most out of your Tempo cluster.

Author: ```suggestion
This document explains how read path in Tempo works, what controls you have to tune the read path, details of the core configuration options, and how to tune these configuration options to get the most out of your Tempo cluster.
```

* The querier either reads data from backend and processes the query, or it delegates the query to ingesters and metrics generators based on the type of job, time range, and query type.

![Tempo query path architecture](/media/docs/tempo/tempo-query-frontend.svg)

### Lifecycle of a query

A search request comes from the user, and it is split into multiple jobs in the query-frontend.

These jobs are then added to a queue and queriers pick up jobs in batches to process.

A single search query can create hundreds of jobs based on the time range and other variables.
These jobs are batched and sent to queriers.

The querier receives the batch and processes the jobs in the batch, builds results, and sends the results of the whole batch back to the query-frontend.

The query-frontend merges and deduplicates the results, and sends them back to the client.

When querier starts, it opens multiple connections to each query-frontend.

Job batches are sent over these connections, and return the results.
This process is synchronized so a single job batch can block a connection.

The number of connections control the number of batches a querier processes concurrently.

> The number of connections is controlled by `max_concuccrent_queries` OR `frontend_worker.parallelism`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The number of connections is controlled by `querier.max_concuccrent_queries` OR `frontend_worker.parallelism`.
```

    [external_hedge_requests_up_to: <int>]
```

For cloud-specific details:

- [AWS Lambda]({{< relref "./serverless_aws" >}})
- [Google Cloud Run]({{< relref "./serverless_gcp" >}})

## Settings that are safe to increase without major impact.

Scaling up queriers is a safe way to add more query capacity.
At Grafana, we prefer to scale queries horizontally by adding more replicas.
If you see out of memory (OOM) errors, it might be worth scaling the queriers vertically.

There should always be two replicas of query-frontends in a cluster.
If you need to scale, scale query-frontends vertically by adding more CPU and RAM.
Currently, query-frontends aren’t scaled horizontally, but this might change in the future.

The reason we keep only two replicas is because each query-frontend has its own request queue and it also impacts the amount of jobs sent to each querier.

> If you add more query-frontends, you need to tune other configuration parameters to account for the change. We decided to keep query-frontend to two replicas for now.

Author: ```suggestion
If you add more query-frontends, you need to tune other configuration parameters to account for the change.
We decided to keep query-frontend to two replicas for now.
```

#### Guidelines

* In a dedicated cluster with one big tenant, it’s okay to increase the number for `query_frontend.max_outstanding_per_tenant.`
* In a shared cluster with a lot of small tenants, keep the number small.
* If a single tenant is overwhelming the whole cluster, you should decrease this parameter. It reduces the amount of work the tenant can enqueue at once. It starts returning `429` to the tenant.
* If your tenants are complaining about getting `429`, you might want to increase this parameter and scale out queries to handle the query load.
* If you increase other configurations that increase the query throughput or scale queriers, you might want to reduce this parameter to control the amount of work that can be enqueued.

### `query_frontend.max_batch_size` parameter

The number of jobs to batch together in one HTTP request to the querier.
Large search queries over a longer time range produce thousands of jobs.
Instead of sending jobs one by one, batch the jobs and send them at once.
The querier picks up and process them.

Batching pushes jobs faster to the queriers, and reduce the time spent waiting around for jobs to be picked up by the querier.

#### Guidelines

> * Default value of `max_batch_size` is set to `5`. In testing, `5` is a good default across all sizes of clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Default value of `max_batch_size` is set to `5`. In our testing we found that `5` is a good default across all sizes of clusters.
```

Author: I think we could remove the second sentence here entirely - "In our testing, we found that..." isn't necessary because the next buillet says DO NOT change the size.

> * We DO NOT recommend changing the batch size from the default value of `5`. In testing, `5` was the sweet spot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We DO NOT recommend changing the batch size from the default value of `5`. based on our testing, `5` is a good default.
```

Author: In our tech docs, we try not to use "we" unless it's in the release notes. (Refer to https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/style-guide/style-conventions/#address-users-clearly). 

In your sentence, Based should be upper case as the first word in a sentence.

* If the batch size is big, you push more jobs at once but it takes longer for the querier to process the batch and return the results back.
* Big batch size will increase the latency of the querier requests, and they might start hitting timeouts of 5xx, which will increase the rate of retries.
* Bigger `max_batch_size` results in pushing too many jobs to the queriers. The jobs then have to be canceled if a query is exited early.

###  `query_frontend.search.concurrent_jobs` parameter

The number of concurrent jobs to execute when searching the backend. This controls how much work is produced concurrently.

To put it another way, if a search job is sharded into 5000 jobs, and `concurrent_jobs` is set to 1000, then Tempo only executes 1000 jobs concurrently.

> The other 4000 jobs are processed one by one as the first 100 jobs return the responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other 4000 jobs are processed one by one as the first 1000 jobs return the responses.
```

> If Tempo manages to answer the search query without executing all 500 jobs, Tempo exits early and cancels the jobs that weren't started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Tempo manages to answer the search query without executing all 5000 jobs, Tempo exits early and cancels the jobs that weren't started.
```

* If this number is low, big queries that create lots of jobs processed slowly.
* If this number is high, the frontend pushes work faster to queries, and the frontend needs to cancel those jobs if the search exits early because the query is fulfilled.
* If you see high load, spikes, or OOMs in the queriers, you can lower this configuration for a fair QoS and stability.
* Having this number to a high value will allow a single tenant to push lots of work at once and overwhelm the querier. So keeping it to a lower number in a shared cluster allows for fair scheduling.
* This parameter controls how fast jobs are pushed into the queue for queries to be picked up by queries
* Adjusting this can impact your batch size so that metric should be watched while making changes to this configuration, and make sure that actual batch size is around the `max_batch_size`.
* We recommend keeping it high in dedicated clusters with a single big tenant.
* We recommend keeping it low in shared clusters because it ensures that a single tenant can't overwhelm the read path.

### `query_frontend.max_retries` parameter

This option controls the number of times to retry a request sent to a querier.

> We only retry on 5xx from a queriers (_translated from equivalent gRPC error_).

Author: ```suggestion
We only retry on 5xx from a queriers (_translated from the equivalent gRPC error_).
```

> Current configurations only retry if the return is 5xx (_translated from equivalent gRPC error_) from a querier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We only retry on 5xx from a queriers (_translated from equivalent gRPC error_).
```

Author: In our public docs, we try to refrain from using "we" unless it's in release notes.  I need to do another round on the doc to try to work through some of those.

Author: I'm going to ask on the docs-team channel to see what people think if it's okay to use "We" in the case of recommendations.  If it is, then I'll set a linter exception to ignore the "We" usage.

* Don't set `query_frontend.max_retries` to a high number. The default of `2` is a good default.
* Higher retries impact the backend when you have a big query that’s generating lots of jobs.
* High `max_retries` can overwhelm the queriers when they're under heavy load and failing to process the jobs. Retries can snowball, and degrade the query performance.

### `query_frontend.search.target_bytes_per_job` parameter

The target number of bytes for each job to handle when performing a backend search.

This parameter controls the size of a single job, and size of a job dictates how much data a single job reads.
You can tune this to make big or small jobs.

This option controls the upper limit on the size of a job, and can be used as a proxy for  how much data a single search job scans or the amount of work a querier needs to do to process a job.

#### Guidelines

* Setting this to a small value produces too many jobs, and results in more overhead, setting it too high produces big jobs. Queriers might struggle to finish those jobs and it can lead to high latency.

> * In testing, 100MB to 200MB is a sweet spot for this configuration, and works best across different sizes of clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In our testing, 100MB to 200MB is a good range for  this configuration, and works across different sizes of clusters.
```

> * We recommend keeping this fixed within the recommended range and not changing it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We recommend keeping this fixed within the recommended range.
```

Author: Nice edit.

### `querier.search.prefer_self` parameter

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
This configuration only applies to `tempo-serverless`.
{{< /admonition >}}

This setting controls the number of job the querier will process before spilling over the `search_external_endpoints` (tempo-serverless).

#### Guidelines

> * In testing at Grafana, serverless suffered from cold starts problems. If your query load is predictable, serverless isn't recommended.

Author: ```suggestion
* In testing at Grafana Labs, serverless suffered from cold starts problems. If your query load is predictable, serverless isn't recommended.
```

    [external_hedge_requests_up_to: <int>]
```

For cloud-specific details:

- [AWS Lambda]({{< relref "./serverless_aws" >}})
- [Google Cloud Run]({{< relref "./serverless_gcp" >}})

## Settings that are safe to increase without major impact.

Scaling up queriers is a safe way to add more query capacity.
At Grafana Labs, we prefer to scale queries horizontally by adding more replicas.
If you see out of memory (OOM) errors, it might be worth scaling the queriers vertically.

> There should always be two replicas of query-frontends in a cluster.

Reviewer: I think we should change this to at least two replicas.

I would rewrite this to be `As of today, we recommend running at least two replicas of query-frontend`, and recommend scaling them vertically instead of horizontally.`

Author: How does this look? 
```suggestion
We recommend running at least two replicates of query-frontend. These replicas should be scaled vertically instead of horizontally. ```

### `query_frontend.max_batch_size` parameter

The number of jobs to batch together in one HTTP request to the querier.
Large search queries over a longer time range produce thousands of jobs.
Instead of sending jobs one by one, batch the jobs and send them at once.
The querier picks up and process them.

Batching pushes jobs faster to the queriers, and reduce the time spent waiting around for jobs to be picked up by the querier.

#### Guidelines

* Default value of `max_batch_size` is set to `5`. In testing, `5` is a good default across all sizes of clusters.
* We DO NOT recommend changing the batch size from the default value of `5`. In testing, `5` was the sweet spot.
* If the batch size is big, you push more jobs at once but it takes longer for the querier to process the batch and return the results back.
* Big batch size will increase the latency of the querier requests, and they might start hitting timeouts of 5xx, which will increase the rate of retries.
* Bigger `max_batch_size` results in pushing too many jobs to the queriers. The jobs then have to be canceled if a query is exited early.

> ###  `query_frontend.search.concurrent_jobs` parameters

Author: ```suggestion
###  `query_frontend.search.concurrent_jobs` parameter
```

Current configurations only retry if the return is 5xx (_translated from equivalent gRPC error_) from a querier.

#### Guidelines

* This option controls the retries from query-frontend to queriers.
* High `max_retries` amplifies the slow queriers and result in a lot more load then required.
* Low `max_retries` can lead to users having bad experience due failed queriers, because  a job failed and wasn’t retried.
* If there are too many retries in a cluster, it can be a sign that queriers are struggling to finish work and needs to be scaled up.
* Big jobs (high `target_bytes_per_job` or `max_batch_size`) can result in increased retries. Make the jobs smaller by reducing the `target_bytes_per_job` or `max_batch_size` to reduce the retries. If not, scale up the queriers.
* Don't set `query_frontend.max_retries` to a high number. The default of `2` is a good default.
* Higher retries impact the backend when you have a big query that’s generating lots of jobs.
* High `max_retries` can overwhelm the queriers when they're under heavy load and failing to process the jobs. Retries can snowball, and degrade the query performance.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

### `query_frontend.search.target_bytes_per_job` parameter

The target number of bytes for each job to handle when performing a backend search.

This parameter controls the size of a single job, and size of a job dictates how much data a single job reads.
You can tune this to make big or small jobs.

This option controls the upper limit on the size of a job, and can be used as a proxy for  how much data a single search job scans or the amount of work a querier needs to do to process a job.

#### Guidelines

* Setting this to a small value produces too many jobs, and results in more overhead, setting it too high produces big jobs. Queriers might struggle to finish those jobs and it can lead to high latency.
* In testing, 100MB to 200MB is a sweet spot for this configuration, and works best across different sizes of clusters.
* We recommend keeping this fixed within the recommended range and not changing it.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

### `querier.search.prefer_self` parameter

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
This configuration only applies to `tempo-serverless`.
{{< /admonition >}}

This setting controls the number of job the querier will process before spilling over the `search_external_endpoints` (tempo-serverless).

#### Guidelines

* In testing at Grafana, serverless suffered from cold starts problems. If your query load is predictable, serverless isn't recommended.
* Increase the value of `prefer_self` if you want to process more jobs in the querier and spill out in extreme cases.
* Setting this to a very big number is as good as turning it off because the querier tries to process all the jobs and it never spills over to serverless.
* If we set this to a low value, we spill more jobs to serverless, even when queriers have capacity to process the job, and due to cold start, query latency increases.

> ### `querier.frontend_worker.parallelism`

Author: ```suggestion
### `querier.frontend_worker.parallelism` parameter
```

A single batch is processed in sync and size of the batch is controlled by `max_batch_size`, a connection is blocked until it's process and returns the result of a batch.

You can also disable it and use `max_concurrent_connections` but we use this to make sure we queriers are picking up work from both query-frontends and jobs are being scheduled fairly.

If you want to make sure you always have connections defined in this config, you should set  `match_max_concurrent: false` in your configuration to ensure you are not limited by `max_concurrent_connections`.

#### Guidelines

* Maximum number of jobs a querier processes when using parallelism is equal to `parallelism * query_frontend replicas * max_batch_size`.
* As you add more queriers, connections to an individual frontend increase. Query-frontend has a shared lock on these connections so if you see issues when you scale out queriers, lower the parallelism to reduce contention.
* It’s recommended to set `match_max_concurrent: false` and not set `max_concurrent_queries` when using parallelism.

> ### querier.max_concurrent_queries

Author: ```suggestion
### `querier.max_concurrent_queries` parameter
```
